docs/token-usage.md, before:

# Token Usage in API Responses

This document outlines how authentication tokens are used in the API responses of the auth-backend service.

## Authentication Flow

The authentication system uses a dual-token approach:

1. **Access Token**: Short-lived JWT used for API authorization
2. **Refresh Token**: Long-lived token used to obtain new access tokens

## Token Format

All tokens are JSON Web Tokens (JWT) with the following structure:

```
Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJ1c2VySWQiOiI5M2FkM2YyOS05Yjc3LTQ0MDAtODA0ZS1jMmI0ZGQ5N2RlZjciLCJleHAiOjE2NDEyMzQzODgsImlhdCI6MTY0MTIzMzc4OH0.WMS6Eur3HyFPDkdvGzlznaXd5FFA6z7TBBF9qbAStdI
```

## Access Token

Access tokens are returned in the API response body after successful authentication operations:

### Response Format

```json
{
  "data": {
    "user": {
      // User profile information
    },
    "accessToken": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9..."
  }
}
```

### Token Details

- **Lifespan**: 15 minutes
- **Format**: JWT
- **Payload**:
  ```json
  {
    "userId": "user-uuid",
    "exp": 1641234388,
    "iat": 1641233788
  }
  ```

### Usage

Include the access token in subsequent API requests:

```
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9...
```

## Refresh Token

Refresh tokens are delivered as an HTTP-only cookie:

### Cookie Properties

- **Name**: `auth-app-refreshToken`
- **HttpOnly**: Yes (not accessible from JavaScript)
- **Secure**: Yes in production (only sent over HTTPS)
- **SameSite**: Lax
- **Path**: /
- **MaxAge**: 7 days (604800 seconds)

### Token Details

- **Lifespan**: 7 days
- **Format**: JWT
- **Payload**:
  ```json
  {
    "userId": "user-uuid",
    "type": "refresh",
    "exp": 1641839388,
    "iat": 1641233788
  }
  ```

## API Endpoints Using Tokens

### POST `/api/v1/auth/login`

Authenticates a user and returns:
- Access token in response body
- Refresh token as HTTP-only cookie

### POST `/api/v1/auth/refresh`

Uses the refresh token from the cookie to:
- Generate a new access token
- Rotate the refresh token (invalidating the old one)
- Return the new access token in the response body
- Set the new refresh token as an HTTP-only cookie

### GET `/api/v1/auth/me` (Protected)

Requires a valid access token to:
- Return the current user's profile information

### POST `/api/v1/auth/logout`

- Clears the refresh token cookie
- Invalidates tokens for the user

## Rate Limiting

To protect against brute force attacks and abuse, the API implements rate limiting on authentication endpoints:

### Rate Limit Types

1. **Global Rate Limiter**:
   - Applies to all API endpoints
   - 60 requests per minute per IP address
   - Affects all routes including protected ones

2. **Authentication Rate Limiter**:
   - Applies to sensitive auth endpoints (`/login`, `/register`, `/refresh`)
   - 5 requests per 15 minutes per IP address
   - Provides extra protection for authentication operations

3. **API Rate Limiter**:
   - Applies to general API endpoints
   - 30 requests per minute per IP address
   - Balanced protection for normal API usage

### Intelligent Request Identification

Our rate limiting uses a sophisticated identification strategy to ensure fair limits:

1. **For authenticated users**: Uses the user's ID to track limits individually
   - Prevents legitimate users from being affected by others sharing the same IP

2. **For public requests**: Uses a combination of:
   - IP address
   - Request path
   - Truncated user agent signature

This approach prevents shared IP issues (corporate networks, VPNs) while still protecting against distributed attacks.

### Rate Limit Response Headers

When a request is made, these headers are included in the response:

- `X-RateLimit-Limit`: Maximum number of requests allowed in the window
- `X-RateLimit-Remaining`: Number of requests remaining in the current window
- `X-RateLimit-Reset`: Time (in seconds) until the rate limit window resets

### Rate Limit Exceeded Response

When a rate limit is exceeded, the API returns:

```json
{
  "error": "Too many requests, please try again later"
}
```

With HTTP status code 429 (Too Many Requests).

## Error Responses

Authentication failures return appropriate 401/403 status codes with the following error formats:

```json
{
  "error": {
    "code": "ERROR_CODE",
    "message": "Human-readable error message"
  }
}
```

### Common Error Codes

- `INVALID_ACCESS_TOKEN`: The access token is malformed or has an invalid signature
- `ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRED`: The access token has expired
- `NO_REFRESH_TOKEN`: No refresh token provided in the cookie
- `INVALID_REFRESH_TOKEN`: The refresh token is malformed or has an invalid signature
- `REFRESH_TOKEN_EXPIRED`: The refresh token has expired
- `UNAUTHORIZED`: Generic authentication failure

## Token Security Considerations

1. Access tokens should be stored in memory only, never in localStorage or sessionStorage
2. Refresh tokens are automatically handled via HTTP-only cookies
3. CSRF protection is implemented on the server
4. Token validation includes signature verification, expiration checking, and user status validation

Commit message:

docs: update token usage documentation to clarify rate limiting based on unique keys and enhance explanation of request identification strategies

docs/token-usage.md, after:

# Token Usage in API Responses

This document outlines how authentication tokens are used in the API responses of the auth-backend service.

## Authentication Flow

The authentication system uses a dual-token approach:

1. **Access Token**: Short-lived JWT used for API authorization
2. **Refresh Token**: Long-lived token used to obtain new access tokens

## Token Format

All tokens are JSON Web Tokens (JWT) with the following structure:

```
Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJ1c2VySWQiOiI5M2FkM2YyOS05Yjc3LTQ0MDAtODA0ZS1jMmI0ZGQ5N2RlZjciLCJleHAiOjE2NDEyMzQzODgsImlhdCI6MTY0MTIzMzc4OH0.WMS6Eur3HyFPDkdvGzlznaXd5FFA6z7TBBF9qbAStdI
```

## Access Token

Access tokens are returned in the API response body after successful authentication operations:

### Response Format

```json
{
  "data": {
    "user": {
      // User profile information
    },
    "accessToken": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9..."
  }
}
```

### Token Details

- **Lifespan**: 15 minutes
- **Format**: JWT
- **Payload**:
  ```json
  {
    "userId": "user-uuid",
    "exp": 1641234388,
    "iat": 1641233788
  }
  ```

### Usage

Include the access token in subsequent API requests:

```
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9...
```

## Refresh Token

Refresh tokens are delivered as an HTTP-only cookie:

### Cookie Properties

- **Name**: `auth-app-refreshToken`
- **HttpOnly**: Yes (not accessible from JavaScript)
- **Secure**: Yes in production (only sent over HTTPS)
- **SameSite**: Lax
- **Path**: /
- **MaxAge**: 7 days (604800 seconds)

### Token Details

- **Lifespan**: 7 days
- **Format**: JWT
- **Payload**:
  ```json
  {
    "userId": "user-uuid",
    "type": "refresh",
    "exp": 1641839388,
    "iat": 1641233788
  }
  ```

## API Endpoints Using Tokens

### POST `/api/v1/auth/login`

Authenticates a user and returns:
- Access token in response body
- Refresh token as HTTP-only cookie

### POST `/api/v1/auth/refresh`

Uses the refresh token from the cookie to:
- Generate a new access token
- Rotate the refresh token (invalidating the old one)
- Return the new access token in the response body
- Set the new refresh token as an HTTP-only cookie

### GET `/api/v1/auth/me` (Protected)

Requires a valid access token to:
- Return the current user's profile information

### POST `/api/v1/auth/logout`

- Clears the refresh token cookie
- Invalidates tokens for the user

## Rate Limiting

To protect against brute force attacks and abuse, the API implements rate limiting on authentication endpoints:

### Rate Limit Types

1. **Global Rate Limiter**:
   - Applies to all API endpoints
   - 60 requests per minute per unique key
   - Affects all routes including protected ones

2. **Authentication Rate Limiter**:
   - Applies to sensitive auth endpoints (`/login`, `/register`, `/refresh`)
   - 5 requests per 15 minutes per unique key
   - Provides extra protection for authentication operations

3. **API Rate Limiter**:
   - Applies to general API endpoints
   - 30 requests per minute per unique key
   - Balanced protection for normal API usage

### Intelligent Request Identification

Our rate limiting uses a sophisticated identification strategy to ensure fair limits:

1. **For authenticated users**: Uses the user's ID to track limits individually
   - Ensures each authenticated user gets their own rate limit quota

2. **For login/register operations**: Uses the email address from the request body
   - Prevents credential stuffing and brute force attacks on specific accounts
   - Limits login/registration attempts per email address rather than by IP

3. **For public requests**: Uses a composite fingerprint based on:
   - Request path
   - Browser characteristics (user agent, accepted languages, browser identification)
   - Does NOT rely solely on IP addresses which can affect multiple legitimate users

This approach provides more precise rate limiting while avoiding the pitfalls of shared IPs (corporate networks, NATs, VPNs) that could unintentionally rate-limit groups of users.

### Rate Limit Response Headers

When a request is made, these headers are included in the response:

- `X-RateLimit-Limit`: Maximum number of requests allowed in the window
- `X-RateLimit-Remaining`: Number of requests remaining in the current window
- `X-RateLimit-Reset`: Time (in seconds) until the rate limit window resets

### Rate Limit Exceeded Response

When a rate limit is exceeded, the API returns:

```json
{
  "error": "Too many requests, please try again later"
}
```

With HTTP status code 429 (Too Many Requests).

## Error Responses

Authentication failures return appropriate 401/403 status codes with the following error formats:

```json
{
  "error": {
    "code": "ERROR_CODE",
    "message": "Human-readable error message"
  }
}
```

### Common Error Codes

- `INVALID_ACCESS_TOKEN`: The access token is malformed or has an invalid signature
- `ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRED`: The access token has expired
- `NO_REFRESH_TOKEN`: No refresh token provided in the cookie
- `INVALID_REFRESH_TOKEN`: The refresh token is malformed or has an invalid signature
- `REFRESH_TOKEN_EXPIRED`: The refresh token has expired
- `UNAUTHORIZED`: Generic authentication failure

## Token Security Considerations

1. Access tokens should be stored in memory only, never in localStorage or sessionStorage
2. Refresh tokens are automatically handled via HTTP-only cookies
3. CSRF protection is implemented on the server
4. Token validation includes signature verification, expiration checking, and user status validation
